.TH LPURGE 8 Lustre LLNL LPURGE
.SH NAME
lpurge \- lustre purge utility
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "lpurge [options] directory"
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B lpurge
recursively descends \fIdirectory\fR, generating a list of files that
have not been used in a specified number of days.  The time of last use is
defined as the greatest of atime, mtime, or ctime.
Files can optionally be removed as the list is generated.
All types of files are considered for eligibility except directories.
Symbolic links are not followed in directory traversal or file removal.
.LP
Although \fBlpurge\fR works with any file system, it activates an
optimization to minimize costly stat(2) calls if it detects
that \fIdirectory\fR is on a Lustre file system.
On Lustre, stat(2) triggers queries to both the metadata server (MDS)
and object storage servers (OSS). To avoid calling stat(2) on every file,
\fBlpurge\fR first calls the IOC_MDC_GETFILEINFO ioctl to retrieve the
MDS times, and only calls stat(2) if MDS times are older than the
purge threshold.
.LP
\fBlpurge\fR provides the following statistics on stderr upon completion:
number of inodes scanned (including directories), number of inodes scanned
per second, percentage of scanned inodes eligible for purge, total size
of eligible files, and elapsed wall clock time.
.SH OPTIONS
.B lpurge
accepts the following options:
.TP
\fI\-R\fB, \fI\-\-remove\fR
Unlink eligible files during the scan.
If this option is used, a purge threshold and log file must also be specified
on the command line (see below).
.TP
\fI\-d\fR, \fI\-\-days\fR n
Set the purge threshold to \fIn\fR days ago.
Files with a time of last use older than the purge threshold
will be considered eligible for purge.
.TP
\fI\-o\fR, \fI\-\-outfile\fR filename
Log eligible files to \fIfilename\fR.
If \fIfilename\fR exists, output will be appended.
If \fIfilename\fR is \-, log to stdout.
The log file contains one line per eligible file, with each line
containing the following fields delimited by single spaces:
(1) \fIa|c|m\fR (single character) indicating which of atime, ctime,
or mtime appears in field 2;
(2) \fItime-of-last-use\fR in yyyy-mm-dd-hh:mm:ss format;
(3) \fIsize\fR (fixed point, kilobyte resolution) in megabytes;
(4) \fIuid\fR of file owner;
and (5) \fIpath\fR of file.
.TP
\fI\-i\fR, \fI\-\-inode-tally\fR filename
Log a count of inodes (including directories) contained in the top
level subdirectories of \fIdirectory\fR to \fIfilename\fR.
If \fIfilename\fR exists, it will be truncated.
If \fIfilename\fR is \-, log to stdout.
Each line contains the inode count and subdirectory path.
All inodes are counted regardless of their purge eligibility.
Inodes contained under excluded directories (see below) are not counted.
.TP
\fI\-x\fR, \fI\-\-exclude\fR directory
Do not descend into \fIdirectory\fR.
The path should be fully qualified.
Excluded directories with the same path prefix as the purge directory
must exist or \fBlpurge\fR will refuse to start.
This option may be specified multiple times and in combination with
the \fI\-X\fR option.
.TP
\fI\-X\fR, \fI\-\-exclude\-from\fR filename
Exclude directory paths listed, one per line, in \fIfilename\fR.
Directory paths should be fully qualified.
Excluded directories with the same path prefix as the purge directory
must exist or \fBlpurge\fR will refuse to start.
This option may be specified multiple times and in combination with
the \fI\-x\fR option.
The file may contain white space or comments prefixed with a \fI#\fR
character.
.TP
\fI\-s\fR, \fI\-\-stat\-always\fR
Disable the Lustre optimization discussed in the DESCRIPTION section,
and always use the stat(2) system call.
.SH "EXAMPLES"
To run \fBlpurge\fR weekly on the /mnt/lustre file system, purging
files with time of last use older than 60 days, one might put a script
like the following in /etc/cron.weekly:
.IP
.nf
#!/bin/bash
OFILE=/var/log/lpurge.files.$(date +%Y-%m-%d)
IFILE=/var/log/lpurge.inodes.$(date +%Y-%m-%d)
/usr/sbin/lpurge -R -d 60 -X /etc/lpurge.exemptions \\
                 -o $OFILE -i $IFILE /mnt/lustre
/admin/scripts/lpurge-post $OFILE $IFILE
.fi
.LP
The optional \fIlpurge-post\fR post-processing script could split
lpurge.files on the uid field to create and email weekly purge
reports to users.  It could also generate summary reports of
inodes and storage space reclaimed per user, and plot per-user
file size histograms to get a picture of how the file system
is being used and by whom.
.SH CAVEATS
\fBlpurge\fR only calls statfs(2) on \fIdirectory\fR, and presumes its
determination whether or not \fIdirectory\fR is in Lustre applies
recursively.
.LP
\fBlpurge\fR presumes that \fIatime\fR, \fIctime\fR, \fImtime\fR are
coherent across clients.  It would appear that \fIatime\fR (at least)
may not be coherent, therefore it is suggested that lustre locks be
explicitly dropped, e.g. by running \fBlflush\fR or remounting,
before running \fBlpurge\fR.
